Well there we go from the Middle East to Ireland. It's this evening's Ask Your
Herb Doctor. My name's Andrew Murray. My name's Sarah Johanneson Murray. For those of
you who perhaps have never listened to the shows they run every Friday, every
third Friday, sorry, from 7.30 to 8 p.m. we have callers but they run from 7 to
8 o'clock on the third Friday of every month. We've been for a long time now
being very pleased to have Dr. Raymond Peat joining us with various different
topics. This month will be no exception. I wanted to try and do some kind of a
gosh I don't know, introduction or some kind of an outline, a basis, something in which I
know that people listening to these podcasts who I get emails from
regularly all over the world, not just the States, who've been listening to them,
have found them interesting and informative and it's led them to read
research from people that Dr. Peat's mentioned on the show or they've had
conditions and illnesses and they've recovered, listening to Dr. Peat's advice
etc etc. So I'm very much aware that this is a real resource with which people are
being reached and there will always be those people who are looking for
something different, something alternative, as well as those people who
are not looking and they won't listen and they've already got their
path set out but there's plenty of people who are looking for alternatives
and so that's what the thrust of this show has been for the last 12 years
probably. So as I said we're very pleased to have Dr. Raymond Peat to join
us and I wanted to do an outline starting this month with endocrinology
as the subject and I wanted to just to outline the nervous system as a whole
and then we're going to get into Parkinson's disease and Parkinsonism
and a few of the other little subsets that are similar as an introduction to
the endocrine system and then maybe next month we'll get into the pituitary. I
know we've mentioned a lot about thyroid hormones and Dr. Peat's main
speciality is hormone, hormone physiology so and then the thymus and the adrenals,
pancreas, ovaries and testes as other sources of hormones and how they affect
health and how everything that we do can consciously interact for good or bad
with our health. We're not at the mercy of anything in particular, we make
choices and so each one of us just by hearing and listening and then going
ahead and reading and seeing the facts and the science people can find
further information to support everything Dr. Peat's been shouting from
the rooftops for for the last 30-40 years. So you there Dr. Peat? Yes. Well thanks so
much for joining us. So I wanted to try to explore the endocrine system in a
large topic I know but one I feel will be a useful exercise in understanding
physiology from your perspective Dr. Peat and you make regular mention of
pioneering scientists whose works give a better appreciation of the physiological
processes occurring in the body and often provide a new direction away from
the hijacked modern scientific theories we're cultured to accept a lot of which
are a pandora's box of ever-increasing drug dependencies and conspiracies
abound along with that train of thought. Given we are truly complex organisms
with a network of communication systems and feedback either positive or negative
to that input, the pathways through which these signals travel as well as the
structures which respond to the signals and the signals which ultimately affect
another system all need to be cohesively organized. So any deficit however small
can have far-reaching and dramatic consequences and it is true that the
organism will do everything possible to correct or mitigate disease before
failing sometimes resulting in disease processes that take decades to end in
death and so communication systems and appropriate responses are key to good
health and functioning and this is the role of the endocrine system I want to
explore with you Dr. Peat. The earliest records of recognizing the role and it
may be earlier than this but the earliest records that I found during my
last two days or so getting material together for the show was the Chinese
pulling out isolated sex and pituitary hormones from human urine in 200 BC for
crying out loud. So that's true that's certainly food for thought when we think
we know everything that we know now with ICP-MS and other mass spectrometry being
the kind of leading investigative machinery so and then obviously the
ancient Greeks and Romans from Aristotle Hippocrates and Galen and where we get
our herbal medicine background from until the emergence of the germ theory.
I know you mentioned this a lot in the 19th century then and this is I think is
perhaps where it's veered off of normality and and common sense and it's
real true scientific endeavor that's where it kind of just veered off the
rails and I think we've carried on in that vein ever since and I know that
your whole philosophy has been about challenging mainstream science for
science's sake because it's not very scientific and I think in that in that
regard Dr. Peat would you mind giving an overview of the basis of understanding
disease past the present and how this has formed our approach to its management
and how your rationale differs? I see it as a deviation from from the Chinese and
the Greeks who had a pretty unified picture of what an organism is.
Aristotle actually was pretty much an organicist in his understanding of the
organism and it was really around the time of Descartes middle of the early
part of the 17th century when the things really got formalized on the wrong track.
Descartes described the organism as a machine completely separate from
consciousness. Consciousness was guiding the machine possibly from
some contact point in the brain but under the ground mostly of people
who were persecuted by the monarchies and such they continued to think along
the organic unified understanding of what an animal or a person is but
following Descartes the organism was seen as made up of parts just like a
steam engine or a clock. Each part could be defined and understood and
mechanically interlocked with the other parts and the consciousness or the soul
was seen as something completely separate from this machine and could
somehow sometimes interfere with its operation but mostly it was out of our
control simply running according to causal determinism and when the idea of
infection something from the environment causing a disease came in it happened
that the use of the microscope had developed to the point that people had
seen the compartments in plants and they called the compartments cells when the
plant dried up and left the cellulose framework empty little chambers which
they called cells and well a more underground approach looked at
particles like red blood cells and called the units corpuscles little
bodies rather than empty compartments and this idea of breaking the organism
down into cells and seeing those as parts of a machine made up of material
without consciousness or spirit this became the background for seeing a
disease as a particular mechanical interference with the operation of the
machine. And this is where the term reductionism came from right or
reductionist medicine? Yeah and the disease one line of thinking was that it
was a particular little particle of evil material a germ cell analogous to the
cells that make up the machine so it was a material particle interfering with our
material particles that became identified as a disease a very concrete
specific interference with the machine and as people look more closely at
tumors they saw really it was a matter of organization rather than some
particular concrete change or substance but this idea of organization took about
a hundred and fifty years to finally catch on right up until the beginning of
this century people were still stuck on Descartes picture of a mechanical
organism being interrupted by something right down on the cellular level or even
smaller the molecular level so that cancer was defined as an evil cell a
mutant cell containing bad genetic material defective DNA and so all you
had to do in the case of a germ-caused disease all you had to do was kill the
germ and you were cured in the case of the cancer interpreted as a mutant cell
all you had to do was eliminate every single individual mutant cell and the
disease would be cured. I mean that's still how they treat cancer now isn't it?
I mean to some degree. Almost everyone is still stuck in this 17th century idea of
what an organism is and what a disease is and Parkinson's disease even though
in the 19th century people recognized all the symptoms of the disease
stiffness generally the older a person is the more Parkinson's traits they have
stiffness wobbly tremor and slowness of movement all of the extreme old age
symptoms are simply coming on stronger and earlier when they call it
Parkinson's disease but in by the latter part of the 19th century people had
noticed that people suffering from this so-called disease if they took a long
train ride to get to the doctor their symptoms might disappear or if they came
on a carriage or rode a horse their symptoms were greatly alleviated by
just moving around through space and so some people proposed a vibration
therapy about 40 years ago someone noticed that swimming alleviated the
symptoms so simply a different kind of stimulation could reverse the symptoms
and it turns out that in animals that you can create the disease by poisoning
them and by giving them an enriched environment you can reverse the actual
anatomical chemical changes of their nervous system. So in the poisoned animals
if you place them in an enriched environment you're saying that they no
longer display the... yeah similar to what they noticed in people who took a long
train ride. All right you're listening to AskUrob Dr. K. A. D. Garboville
91.1 FM at 715 now so from 730 to the end of the show at 8 o'clock you're
invited to call in with questions either related hopefully related to the
question subject matter of the endocrine system and Parkinson's if you have any
other endocrine based questions that would be fine too. If you're in the area
seems like there's still a temporary call-in number which is 707 383 9007 so
383 9007 the toll-free numbers should still be the same here 1-800-KMUD-RAD
that's 800-568-3723 and the engineer I think you're gonna read some things out.
Yeah thanks Andrew I actually should have done this at the top of the hour we
would not have this show without the support of Chautauqua Natural Foods in
Garboville locally owned for 34 years they specialize in local and organic
produce natural groceries nutritional supplements and body care products now
announcing every day is senior day Chautauqua Natural Foods open Monday
through Saturday 9 till 7 Sundays 10 till 5 just off the town square more
information online at facebook.com/chautauquanaturals support for our
community radio station is coming as well from Emerald Kingdom greenhouse
dot-com they've got information and products for all aspects of greenhouse
growing specializing in timer run auto block out light depo greenhouses Emerald
Kingdom greenhouse also carries light depth for existing structure
modification kits and good old-fashioned greenhouses accessories include plastic
coverings light traps cooling pads exhaust and ventilation systems Emerald
Kingdom grow your future the views and opinions expressed throughout the
broadcast day are those of the speakers and not necessarily those of this
station its staff or its underwriters time will be made available for other
viewpoints thank you so much for joining us. Okay so to continue Dr. Peat I wanted to
explore Parkinson's disease and Parkinsonism as there's several
different similar related type situations that may not necessarily be
Parkinson's per se but it does actually seem to be a fairly woolly kind of
construct in terms of the multitude of various symptoms that can be expressed
some of which may start early some of which may just be late onset but
basically they go over the mechanism that's discussed today about the disease
and its treatment and highlight your approach to this condition later on to
understand it the way you do so the terms used to describe long-term
degenerative disorder of the central nervous system affecting mainly the
motor system but which can involve the sensory system with cognitive and sleep
and mood disturbances also noted as part of the picture there's a compound here
and I know we talked about this the other day alpha-synuclein a compound
present in these so-called Lewy bodies that are present under microscopic
examination found within the substantia nigra in the brain yeah as well as
several other brain regions and they are diagnostic for Parkinson's disease
okay so several Parkinson's genes are involved and they've been high been
highlighted here I'd like to pick your brains about some of those as we go on
through this but so far as the functioning of waste product digesting
lysosomes that may be linked to the inability to break down alpha-synuclein
there's a protein also called Dardarin now the primary symptoms of Parkinson's
result from the loss of dopamine secreting cells within the substantia
nigra and there are five major pathways in the brain that we know now there may
be more but there were five when I was studying connecting other brain areas
with the basal ganglia these are the motor so this is a movement ocular motor
where the eyes will track the hands or the eyes the eye movement will track the
movement externally the associative the limbic and the orbitofrontal circuits
now all of them are disrupted essentially and this disruption
explains the many varied presentations of the disease so in terms of how you
understand the nervous system and physiology just to start with the motor
circuit and how higher brain stem functions interact through nerves to
elicit muscular contraction for example because we will talk about the tremor of
Parkinson's disease and we'll go on later to describe some of the drugs and
treatments that can be used but they are also responsible chronically for the
same symptoms such that it's almost a worse outcome than the initial outcome
so it's not a particularly successful treatment but in terms of the motor
system of the nervous system and the various drugs second messengers etc that
exert those controls how did how do you see this motor circuit working in the
body and how would you perhaps be able to rationalize an alternative approach
to the treatment of Parkinson's disease given given how you know my orientation
is very similar to Pavlov's who saw the motor system as subordinate to the
sensory system he saw the cortex of the brain as primarily an extension of the
sense organs and that this formed the environment for the motor reflexes and
the idea of a reflex is another thing that originated with Descartes and the
simply wrong that the the cells aren't mechanically connected in in
reflex patterns one of the first people in the West to analyze this carefully
was the French existentialist so-called philosopher Merleau-Ponty Maurice
Merleau-Ponty who analyzed the meaning of reflexes and he clearly shows that
there are no reflexes in the Cartesian sense and if you attend a neurology
course you'll probably find people still arguing that there are simple innate
mechanical reflexes in the Descartes sense and for example the linguistics
system of Noam Chomsky is based entirely on this primitive false idea of the
brain function based on mechanical reflexes and it simply doesn't work
Merleau-Ponty is probably the person who most clearly explains the problems with
it but in the Pavlovian picture as especially developed through the 1950s
and 60s by his student P.K. Anokin the sensory system is fluid and
continuously being revised as the organism explores its environment and so
the sense of exploring and being stimulated by newness the idea of
traveling through time and space is in charge over overriding defects in the
motor system that's a relevant picture I think for seeing disease
especially Parkinson's disease in a non-mechanical way the protein you
mentioned dargarin yeah the interesting thing about it is that it shows up as a
defect in Crohn's disease in the intestine as well as in Parkinson's
disease and Parkinson's typically starts with constipation and in 19th century
medicine people remembered the intestine as well as the brain in treating disease
it was very common to diagnose death as a result of inflammation of the bowel
which a pathologist typically overlook as just a side issue but the intestine
was recognized as very important and the brain as the other end of the organism
that sort of the two dimensions and now doctors are taught that if you have a
bowel movement three times a day or once every three days it's all normal yeah
and when you trace out the the chemical links between what's going wrong with in
the intestine and in the the rest of the motor system the behavioral system and
so on you can see links but they're they're always contextually working
there is no simple pathogenic chemical in the intestine but the the bacteria
living in the intestine the food you eat and the way your intestine responds to
it and the stress you're exposed to yeah these act in in the the activating part
of the brain around 1950 a part of the brain called the reticular activating
system was identified and this includes the region where the substantia nigra
and the basal ganglia are and this is where sensory input is dished out to
activate the upper parts of the brain and when that's happening it tends to go
with an inhibitory effect on the body so the stronger your mentality is dreaming
for example the more relaxed your body tends to be and in Parkinson's the
system it really tends to be over activated unable to relax properly and
so a characteristic thing is that during sleep and dreams the person who is
developing Parkinson's disease doesn't relax properly the body if they have a
dream they might scream and thrash around and hit people so there's a
failure of consciousness to override and relax the body. Can I take you back to
what you said a moment ago about reminds me of inescapable stress and the rat
experiments and that being countered by the environmental enrichment that you
said could totally restore a Parkinson's created or induced effect in a mouse
that was put into a environmental enrichment situation naturally lost the
symptoms. I know that one does not directly causatively cure the other
but you were saying here that there's a link between environmental enrichment
and the progressive replacement of gosh what can we call it something
substantially good that offsets the negative effects of the inflammation the
degradation the slowing of the bowel endotoxin release etc etc reabsorption
and and that this is this is a definite key feature if you think that you think
it could be all definitely as part of a holistic program sure I can understand
that would be very plausible to suggest something like that but is that where
you were going to? Yes, P.K. Anokin and all of the people in the Pavlovian
tradition see a global evander process in the brain that they called the
acceptor of action it's our intention and expectation in the world and this is
what is integrating not only the motor system and dominating the so-called
reflexes but this process which is like a model of everything we know and intend
to do in the world this is supported in the organism not just in the brain but
it's a process involving sensory nerves from the whole body and this process in
the brain it's sort of during during daytime at least it's based on our inner
ear balance system the vestibular system and this it's a unified picture of the
world and the organism and this process itself of being conscious is involved in
the activation of not only the endocrine glands throughout the body but
in the nerves themselves as they are supporting this model of the world or
acceptor of action in the process of metabolizing to be conscious they are
making changes internally that involves for example synthesizing turning energy
substances sugar for example into cholesterol and turning cholesterol into
pregnenolone right in the nerves for example of the substantia nigra this
process is going on energy sugar cholesterol pregnenolone progesterone
and the endocrine process which is then stabilizing the structure and the
consciousness so that the flavor of your consciousness when it's successful is
modified by the balance you have between your progesterone the ATA and other
steroids and the energy processes so can you try to explain like the personality
that you're saying in people that develop Parkinson's they're not and you
know they're experiencing learned helplessness I think the way they live
they have incorporated duties obligations and and such that they they
can manage very well but they aren't overcoming the stress adequately
because they're not exploring new things or they're not they don't have new input
to their brain it's just the same old like a treadmill they're on or yeah
they're stuck in a way so that they aren't getting enough stimulation that's
so interesting because I think when you read the regular texts medical texts
about Parkinson's and they go through the plethora of symptoms one of them was
symptom most characteristic I think is fairly emotionless expressions on the
patients with Parkinson's not infused difficult to engage don't don't have any
kind of what can I say any kind of joy de vivre I don't know how to say it
apart from the French way you know kind of joy of life but that's very much part
of a learned helplessness type construct that would cause an organism then to
just see things just within the boundaries of what they have and then
not be anything new and stimulating them and that stimulation you're saying is
very much part of switching on what is a totally holistic approach to
Parkinson's outside of the mechanistic view that the regular science has and
we'll go through the drugs because the drugs are really not effective at all
and they work very mechanistically and actually cause typically more problems
than they're seeking to address so you're saying new sensory output will
for example I mean sorry new sensory input will for example increase the
dopamine output from the substantia nigra in the brain or the protective
progesterone pregnenolone or the hormones that protect against those
cells degrading not producing dopamine yeah the dopamine theory it's really
part you have to look at it in in the history of at the beginning of the 20th
century with the mechanistic view they were seeing the brain as a mechanical
thing which was having defects causing the tremor and they actually started
cutting out parts of the brain to remove the tremor oh yeah sounds like a good
idea doesn't it the man who invented the word cybernetics Norbert Wiener uh-huh
yeah he proposed the best surgery up to that time instead of cutting out parts
of the cortex which they had been doing in the 1930s they were focusing on the
brainstem and he designed the the radar searching self-control systems that
would focus on an airplane and aim a gun this feedback system he saw the brain
having tremors his radar gun aiming system if it was poorly aligned would
have a tremor of a searching movement back and forth so he saw the tremor as a
feedback searching process and so he suggested what you would do to his radar
apparatus was to knock out part of the sensitivity so he suggested the surgery
to cut out as part of the searching feedback apparatus and it actually worked
better than the grocer surgeries and that it's been done right down to the
70s and 80s they were still simply ablating or destroying part of the brain
then they got a little more refined and started stimulating it but sometimes
that didn't work like Michael Fox yeah he wasn't going to have any more
surgical treatments because instead of stopping the tremor of his left side it
started the tremor in the right side yeah well that's that that's the issue
isn't it well I guess we'll get into some of the medications now just to
bring them out and to explain the mechanistic view that was constructed to
support the use of these drugs but okay so the substantia nigra is part of the
brain here that we're focusing on in Parkinson's that is the site of dopamine
production now dopamine excuse me dopamine is I think I understand this
right but I think the nervous system is pretty much wanting to be firing fairly
constantly and dopamine actually controls that from happening ad hoc so
that you don't get these sudden jerks etc and that dopamine allows through this
inhibition the ordered movement of muscles in coordinated patterns it's not
a stimulant per se and it's it's integrated with the inhibiting systems
so much more of a relaxant yeah in itself it is an activator but it runs
into nerves that feedback with an inhibition right so when when somebody
for example I think L-DOPA is supposedly the gold standard for want of a better
word of treatment and that within five years most patients using L-DOPA as the
replacement for dopamine because L-DOPA dopamine doesn't cross the blood-brain
barrier as far as I know but L-DOPA does and within the brain L-DOPA is converted
into dopamine and then has an action directly but the long-term effects of L-DOPA
are a condition called bradykinesia where there's involuntary
movements like there is in a fine tremor a resting tremor because again there's a
differentiation I guess without getting too medical there's a difference between
intention tremors and resting tremors so resting tremors typically something you
could see in the Parkinson's patients with either leg tremoring or the hand
tremoring in the pill rolling fashion I always remember this from studying but
they they talk about pill rolling tremor as one of the hallmark signs of classical
Parkinson's so supplying somebody with L-DOPA to treat that tremor does
initially have a positive beneficial effect but how is it I wonder that the
administration of dopamine over a chronic period of three four five years
actually causes worse symptoms than the tremor for which it was prescribed and
most patients that use L-DOPA are in worse shape five years down the road
than they are if they weren't treated I think the problem is that the whole
theory of what L-DOPA and dopamine are doing is mechanistic and mistaken it's
so they're just patching that is putting a little band-aid on it they're not
treating the sensory input drug that is approved for use in Parkinson's is
amandadine or memantine more recently and in the 19th century they were
already using belladonna and hyocyamine and I call it nerd chicks to treat the
tremors and they were pretty effective and didn't have bad side effects of
increasing rigidity and so on that L-DOPA does and the it turns out that
these amandadine and memantine have the anti cholinergic anti excitatory effects
but they are also anti excitatory in the glutamate ergic system the glutamate and
cholinergic systems are both very powerful excitatory and the glutamate
system ends up producing nitric oxide and the amandadine and the
cholinergic memantine are not only stopping the the excitation that is part
of the tremor but they end up lowering the exposure to nitric oxide and nitric
oxide is a chronic stress-induced factor in suppressing mitochondrial respiration
and energy production and accelerating aging of the brain so using these
approved drugs is it actually is giving insight into what's going on it to a
much more global organismic process rather than just restoring the lost so
called dopamine regulatory system it's restoring energy processes reducing the
effects of stress in a systematic way okay you're listening to ask your
doctor K. Medegaard with 91.1 FM from now until the end of the show you're
invited to call in for any questions about this subject of endocrinology and
Parkinson's disease if you live in the area the temporary number for the 707
region is 383 9007 and the 800 number is 800 568 3723
so I see the lights flashing here so let's let's take the first call and see
where we're going caller you're on the air and what's your question hi I'm from
the San Francisco Bay Area and I was wondering are there simple things that
someone can do like a stepping stone to get out of learned helplessness for you
know for people that are overcoming hypothyroidism and still find it
overwhelming to do big tasks or big things what was the very first thing you
said the stepping stone stepping stone to get out of the learned helplessness
Dr. Peat do you think there is a progressive course that can be followed
to get out what do you what do you suggest to increase sensory input to the
brain oh and and to help get out of the learned helplessness painting
behavioral things like going new places meeting new people doing very different
things that you've never done before but thought you might enjoy doing at the
same time as you try to correct your your energy processes that are suppressed
having more enjoyable more varied meals for example and making sure that your
thyroid function is good I know you when I asked you what was it one of the best
things I could teach our daughter or what's a good education for our daughter
and you said introduce her to new people and she loves to meet new people and she
gets so fired up okay so Dr. Peat I think just on the on the basis of that last
call in terms of gosh new things I mean I think everybody I think arguably
everybody would most people let's not say everybody that's too all-inclusive
you know people I think have a bucket list of 20 things they'd like to do you
know whether it's jumping out of an aircraft and with a parachute and I
noticed just fast things or exciting things or going to new places I think
outside of the scope of that because most people probably think they can't
afford it or they have a time for it how do you think about creative
outlets like painting and or constructing poetry or as long as that's
not something you do every day anyway I'm just thinking of it as a construct
that would be maybe more more easily attained rather than dr. Peat doesn't
want to give a prescription here I can tell that I'm doing something
unexpected out of the routine and some people actually quit their job and learn
a new profession or trade okay let's get into some of the some of the things that
I'd spoken with you about earlier that were things that are in keeping with the
whole anti-inflammatory process that you're saying is all part and parcel of
this breakdown so I guess mitochondrial function I'm getting pretty pretty
interested about the whole approach to supporting mitochondria and whether it's
coenzyme q10 or other kind of new nootropics and things like that I know
you're not particularly keen on nootropics and drugs that supposedly
enhance mental perfunction and or mitochondrial function because you you
don't you don't really put a lot of value to it but in terms of mitochondria
and and their obvious role in energy production and how energy in the body is
at the root of paying for all the transactions how do you feel about
mitochondrial support in the approach to a Parkinson's patient? Getting
getting good rest is part of the support stopping unnecessary excitatory
stimulation good stimulation should be fun rather than stressful and so not
jumping out of an aircraft. Well unless you find that fun. That's stressful probably. Riding a roller coaster I mean that might be a little bit
stressful it's fun right? Yeah everything that is anti-inflammatory can be
relaxing as well as stimulating. Caffeine is extremely protective against all of
the defects in Parkinson's disease and it activates while protecting the
mitochondria. Gamma-hydroxybutyrate which is in some plants like the passionflower
yeah the tropical fruit what's it called? He was thinking you meant
GABA. Oh well it's an activator gamma-hydroxybutyrate. Okay well the passion fruit or the
liliquoi or what else? Passion fruit. The other name is grenadilla I think it's another name for it.
Yeah it's something we make along with GABA which which helps to eliminate
stressful over excitation. The synuclein which is one of the things that goes
wrong and is damaged in Parkinson's disease it happens to have the same
effect as rotenone. Wow. The toxic thing that has been seen to cause something
exactly like Parkinson's disease by blocking the complex one of the
mitochondrion. So then all of the herbs that act on the GABA would be useful
you're saying? Yeah and even cannabis has been because of its sedative effect it
can be protective against the toxic types of overstimulation. And what about
alcohol? Yeah I think it's an antioxidant can be anti-inflammatory and can be in
the right circumstance it can be anti-inflammatory, anti-Parkinson's. Now how about this
and the nicotine I think a fair amount of research showing that nicotine is
actually protective significantly protective against Parkinson's in a in a
big study that's been done. Yeah I think the population effect where they see
that smokers have somewhat protection against Parkinson's I think part of that
effect is that it relieves constipation it activates the intestine and that in
the self has an anti-inflammatory and a toxic effect. Interesting. So what do you
think is the best method for delivery of nicotine like making a tea? I think
either absorbing it through the skin as in the form of an ointment or ingesting
very small amounts of the leaf, the tobacco leaf. Very quickly I think while we're
talking about tobacco I read an article today that's now saying that the vaping
craze that's really starting to take off and reintroduce smoking to a
younger generation is actually showing up with some fairly disturbing health
effects kind of early days yet for the research to come through but they're
actually saying that even could be even some even worse side effects to vaping
than there would have been to smoking obtaining nicotine that way. So nicotine
in its own right is not well I mean it's a neurotoxin for sure but it's not a
good molecule but it's not the poisonous component in tobacco smoke is mainly the
carcinogens correct and the tar but but nicotine can have some therapeutic
effects. Yeah and keeping the intestine healthy because of the when
endotoxin in itself reaches the nervous system it locally as well as
systemically activates processes that lead to the the same blockage of
mitochondrial respiration that rotenone does or that ionizing radiation does in
the chronic sense having cat scans of the head I think is probably part of the
reason that Parkinson's prevalence has increased so greatly over the last 20 or
30 years. Because they're pretty keen to give you cat scans for anything. Yeah.
Oh well it's a shame but I'm hopeful that in time things far less
damaging will become more commonplace a little bit like the switching attitudes
towards saturated fats from the long protected polyunsaturated have been
shown to do so much damage. Now how about aspirin is another thing
mentioning the polyunsaturated fats one of the prostaglandins produced in
substantia nigra is very toxic to the brain and simply having a regular use of
aspirin will protect against that prostaglandin made from the polyunsaturated
fats and the breakdown of the polyunsaturated fats acrolein is a
very toxic material that we produce internally from the polyunsaturated and
that is one of the things that turns synuclein into a toxic fibrous material
sort of like the prions in mad cow disease. Interesting because now what do
you think about this this concept that the I think I think I was reading that
they haven't actually proved beyond a doubt that these Lewy bodies which do
show up in a substantia on micro you know microscopical evaluation they may
be or they may have a protective role I mean I think they've made them
pathognomic and kind of diagnostic for the confirming Parkinson's but they
they might actually have a kind of a protective role and I think somebody
might be parking to get out of the way some of these synuclein fibrils and
packing them up in little compartments that are relatively safe but some of the
toxic fibrils of synuclein are known to be passed from one cell to another
causing a damage to the cell that receives it. Well I wanted to ask you
Dr. Peat when you were talking about this rapid movement and dream state you
know for people who are developing Parkinson's or what about people who've
had that for years and years and years is that not also a symptom of low
thyroid because their their muscles just can't relax or is it the brain that
can't relax so I'm trying to understand that a little bit better. It's the same
thing nothing in the body can relax fully when your thyroid function is low
that's one of the funny things that came out of the idea of the cell as a
compartment enclosed in a membrane that the if you think of it as a corpuscle
that has to be in a state ready to work when it's rested the state where it's
ready to perform its job is a high energy state and that's the well-rested
state full of energy ready to go. If you don't have enough of the thyroid and
glucose and oxygen whatever to produce the energy you stay in a
semi-contracted excited state so what happens in Parkinson's is this reaches a
chronically deadly cell killing condition in chronic hypothyroidism it's
simply a nuisance that your sleep isn't as restful as it should be you can't get
into the deep relaxing restorative sleep because you don't have enough energy so
the cells are not ready to work they haven't accumulated the energy and
structure needed to do a proper job and so they keep churning through the energy
producing process without relaxing and storing up the energy as glycogen ATP
creatinine phosphate and so on. Okay well I know there was more questions
surrounding things like the monoamine oxidase inhibitors the the A and B
inhibitors and how they have been used with varying degrees but ultimately this
condition doesn't have any real course of action for it other than trying to
offset the symptoms as long as possible followed by palliative care. I would
very much like to carry on this subject next month just to break down some of
the things that are definitely shown like lack of testosterone is definitely
shown and ameliorates makes better the symptoms of Parkinson's reducing
estrogen because estrogens are kind of very inflammatory and kind of anti
anti restful type organism molecule I know there were plenty of other things
and as usual I'm sorry we only got one call I didn't really plug too much for
people to come on the air but I kind of been a bit a little bit selfish this
month maybe next month if you're able would you be willing to carry on with
this? Oh yeah. Great I really appreciate that well for those people who've
listened to the show thanks so much for your time Dr. Peat. Okay thank you. For those
people who've listened to the show thanks so much for either calling in
like you have and or listening we know that I get a such a lot of feedback from
people I get it every week from people they just write me and they come from
all over not just a guy from Norway or you know Finland yeah they come from all
over so I get emails from people from the UK I get them from South America I
get them from from Asia even you know so they listen all over the world and I
think it's very important that it's a resource that we freely make available
KMUD makes it available for you to download this podcast after that show
hours on the audio archive and on our website I'm compiling what's turning out
to be a pretty big compendium of Dr. Peat shows so until the third Friday of
next month we'll carry on with endocrinology as a bigger section anyway
going over all the rest of it in the months to come but we'll try and wrap up
the Parkinson's debate next month and then Dr. Peat has other suggestions that
we didn't even get into. My name is Andrew Murray. My name is Sarah Johanna
Murray and do you want to give out contact details? Yeah sure well we can be
reached Monday through Friday 9 to 5 I have a toll-free number would you like
to know I wanted to give out Dr. Peat's website you forgot to do that I did I
don't have my crib in front of me Mike my crib sheet anyway so Dr. Peat is
obviously he's reachable www.raypeat.com it's got plenty of articles there fully
referenced he's written several books - he's not selling anything he's just
giving you information folks so take him up on it while he's still
around he's still willing to do this. And our phone number is 888 WBM ERB
for Western Botanical Medicine ERB. Okay thanks for joining us. Thanks for
listening good night.